so Bitcoin only has users it doesn't
have any admins there's nobody with a
master key and
um we've you know this this is kind of
the
um simple way of thinking about it which
is 10 years of this thing operating
without anybody being in charge and with
everybody who tried to change the
consensus parameters the most important
parameters of the network everybody who
tried to change these ended up basically
failing and Bitcoin has maintained its
consensus parameters to the point where
you could run it according to the same
code that was available in 2009 and you
could still make it interoperable with
the current chain and that's that's
something that is unique about Bitcoin
which is that it is the coin that you
know I like to call it the Immaculate
Conception somebody made these coins
anybody could have mined the coins from
the first day you know they announced
the currency and they said that I'm
going to start running it on this uh day
and anybody could have joined and since
then everybody who got Bitcoin got
Bitcoin at the market price or because
they mind it and expanded resources
which roughly cost them close to what
the market price was so there are no
insiders in Bitcoin
[Music]
[Applause]
hello everyone I'm pleased today to have
with me Dr savidine Amos
he's an independent Economist as well as
a leading researcher communicator and
educator in the field of Bitcoin he
obtained his PhD at Columbia University
Dr safetine is the author of the Bitcoin
standard which was published in 2018 and
the newly released Fiat standard
he has advised corporations on bitcoin
strategy helping many investors perform
their due diligence on bitcoin Dr Amos
teaches courses on the economics of
Bitcoin and economics in the Austrian
School tradition
in his online learning platform
safadine.com
and also hosts the Bitcoin standard
podcast thanks very much for agreeing to
talk to me today and I'm looking forward
to learning a lot about things I know
very little about today so
um
tell us maybe to begin with about your
books let's start with the Bitcoin
standard and and then move to the Fiat
standard so the Bitcoin standard
yeah well first of all thank you very
much for having me on it's a true
pleasure to be talking to you
um I published the Bitcoin standard in
2018 and
um it was a book that tried to explain
the economics of Bitcoin why Bitcoin
functions why it functions the way it
does and what are the
um implications that you would expect
from the continued growth of Bitcoin uh
in the future and so
um I analyzed it from the perspective of
the Austrian School relying on the work
of economists like Carl manger and
Ludwig von mises and Molly rothbard and
Joe Salerno and friedrichayek and
um I think
um the key insights that I well there
are several key insights but one of the
most important ones in the book is that
Bitcoin is the hardest money that has
ever been invented because
um we've essentially thrown away the the
algorithm for making Bitcoin work has
been set at producing a certain number
of Bitcoin over time that's going to end
at 21 million and there's no way of
making more Bitcoins and I think after
12 years of Bitcoin operating we can
pretty confidently say there's not going
to be more than 21 million Bitcoin and
so that makes Bitcoin truly unique as a
monetary asset because it is the hardest
monetary asset that we've ever found
um let me ask you a question about that
so
why is it important that that limit
exists and what do you mean by hardest
currency compared to other currencies
yeah so the hardness here refers to the
difficulty of making more currency units
to add onto the existing Supply and I
think this is a big deal and essentially
the first four chapters of my book focus
on explaining why this is such a big
deal because if you look historically at
money you find that money has been a
contest of survival of the hardest
people are always looking for the
hardest money available and the ones who
managed to find the hardest money
managed to store their wealth and
successfully whereas the ones who use an
easy money will witness their wealth
dissipate so people will learn but even
if they don't learn you know the market
will brutally teach them the lesson by
discounting and reducing the wealth of
the people who put in the easy money so
the end result is that more and more
wealth will be concentrated in the
harder money and that's why historically
when societies that had hard their money
came into contact with societies that
had easier money they the ones with the
hard money were able to essentially
buy up a lot of the resources of the
Easy Money societies because they could
continue to make more of their money and
therefore the value of the money and
increase the supply of it and there are
many examples in my book about this
seashells and glass beads and limestones
all were used as money when industry
made them scares in certain times and
places but then when modern technology
came and allowed for an increase in
their supply their value was declining
and then in the 9 19th century we see
this happen between gold and silver too
the price of gold and silver I used to
oscillate around 15 ounces of silver per
one ounce of gold and in 150 years it's
now or somewhere around 100 it's gotten
to around 120 recently
so the price of silver has been
declining next to gold and I think that
can be explained by the fact that gold
is harder the supply of silver is being
increased at a faster rate and there was
utility in the use of silver when money
was physical but then with the creation
of essentially
financial instruments that were backed
by gold you could use silver you could
use gold payments for small amounts of
payments as well as large amounts of
payments so that kind of obsoleted the
role of silver and so everybody went
with the harder money and then the
harder money appreciated and the easier
money continued to lose its monetary
status okay so let me let me see if I if
I've got this straight so
money is an abstract store of value
and you always wanted to represent value
as such so something like the exchange
of Labor or the exchange of efficiency
something like that and you can correct
me if I'm wrong there
you have to use something to represent
that abstraction and the problem with
that is that there will be people who
have control over the representation
rather than contributing to the value
and those could be politicians who could
print money or they could be people who
well who find silver or who find gold or
who mine it and so forth so anything
that can be produced that's a
representation is subject to devaluation
if the production becomes more efficient
and anything that's producible
like a paper money can be uh
toyed with by those who have control
over its distribution and so your
argument essentially in the Bitcoin
argument in general is well here's
something that we will never get more of
no matter what we do so I'd like to know
why I should believe that and the next
thing I'd like to know about that maybe
is well why why Bitcoin and not 200
alternative cryptocurrencies like so
Bitcoin can't be produced but
cryptocurrencies can be and so why isn't
that an indication of the softness of
cryptocurrency Bitcoin included yeah
well these are great questions so I
think
um initially yeah you're absolutely spot
on
um it's uh it's exactly that that
whatever gets chosen is money it holds
value because it has value on the market
but as soon as it starts getting chosen
as money it gets into what I call the
easy money trap which is the people who
can make more of it will try and make
more of it people will find a way and
they will make more of it and so the
things that have ended up being used as
money were always the thing that
resisted that the most things that are
the hardest and so gold did an excellent
job with that because Gold's chemistry
naturally gives it that property because
gold is indestructible so because we've
been accumulating gold production over
thousands of years no matter how much
gold we produce this year it's still
going to be a tiny fraction of all of
the stuff that we've accumulated over
the last 5 000 years and so every year
the gold Supply increases by around one
and a half percent and that's why I beat
everything out so the hardest thing ends
up winning you know whether people
consciously realize that that is the
case or just because of the realities of
supply and demand every year we're
making five percent or twenty percent or
thirty percent more silver and maybe 100
more copper and larger quantities of all
other Commodities on the market but
we're only making one and a half or two
percent gold so over time gold holds on
to its value and over time that ends up
being the best store of value so
um gold resisted that and then
um gold failed for issues we could talk
about when we talk about the Fiat
standard but then Bitcoin offers us this
a possibility again which is that nobody
can break this uh algorithm and I must
say this is really the
um the the reasonable skepticism about
Bitcoin is that yeah well you know it's
just a line of code and then anybody can
change it it's a line of code you know
we can change lines of code all the time
somebody can get under the hood and
change the code and it takes a lot of
time to be able to understand why this
is not exactly the case and I try and
make that case in my book extensively in
the latter chapters of the book
but if I were to summarize it I would
say this with Bitcoin what we had was
that the
um the person who created the code he
put it out there he was Anonymous he uh
worked on it for about a year or two and
then he disappeared and that was it
there was nobody in charge since then
it's now been more than 10 years that
he's been disappeared and there has not
been anybody in charge of the project
and what we've only had are users so
Bitcoin only has users it doesn't have
any admins there's nobody with a master
key and
um we've you know this this is kind of
the
um simple way of thinking about it which
is 10 years of this thing operating
without anybody being in charge and with
everybody who tried to change the
consensus parameters the most important
parameters of the network everybody who
tried to change these ended up basically
failing and Bitcoin has maintained its
consensus parameters to the point where
you could run it according to the same
code that was available in 2009 and you
can still make it interoperable with the
current chain and that's that's
something that is unique about Bitcoin
which is that it is the coin that you
know I like to call it the Immaculate
Conception somebody made these coins
anybody could have mined the coins from
the first day you know they announced
the currency and they said I'm going to
start running it on this uh day and
anybody could have joined and since then
everybody who got Bitcoin got Bitcoin at
the market price or because they mined
it and expended resources which roughly
cost them close to what the market price
was so there are no insiders in Bitcoin
and Bitcoin has operated this way for 12
years now
and um this is kind of the sociological
explanations for it now to get more
technical in terms of the explanations
basically Bitcoin is a distributed
Network and so anybody can run the code
on their own computer and the network
functions according to the consensus
parameters that everybody agrees upon
okay so I I don't know what those are
the consensus parameters can you tell me
what those are
what does that mean
basically the the main and most
important rules According to which the
network runs from the beginning and one
of them perhaps the most important
institution yes it's like the
Constitution and perhaps the most
important one is the number of coins
that are generated so we have a very
strict and clear schedule of how many
coins are going to be produced every day
essentially in perpetuity and
um if you abide by these consensus rules
then your computer can be in sync with
the rest of the network and you're in
consensus with the network and you can
and you can buy and sell coins and you
can transact coins on the network but if
you try and break those consensus
parameters you leave the coin so the
miracle of Bitcoin in a sense is that it
has managed to maintain these important
consensus parameters for 12 years now
and it continues to get increasingly
more ossified every day Bitcoin is the
most conservative thing in human history
probably there's not going to be uh it
just continues to get harder and harder
to change the constitution of Bitcoin
and nobody's been able to do it in 12
years so that that's kind of the
um uh superficial or broad picture
explanation of those things but you
could also get into the software itself
um you know it's a distributed Network
so everybody needs to be in consensus
with the network and then if you end up
breaking the rules if you end up trying
to change the rules which a lot of
people have tried to do all that you
will do is that you will end up with
another Bitcoin that is out there
competing on the market with the
original Bitcoin but you've got a lot
less liquidity and you've got a lot less
ability to compete and we've seen many
people try and do that and all that has
happened is that their coins have you
know continued to change their consensus
parameters because once you break the
you know once you break your duck once
then it just becomes much easier to do
it and they've devolved into civil
Strife between participants on the
network and of course they lost economic
value and the value of the network is uh
essentially dissipated close to zero so
uh Bitcoin continues to get stronger
because it continues to demonstrate that
it can do those few very simple
technological tasks and it can do them
reliably and it can do them according to
the same rules that it has been doing
them for 12 years that's kind of the
value proposition it's immutable it's
decentralized and the money supply is
fixed so that's kind of a big deal if
you put all of these all together
right and so it's hard for anyone to
make a Bitcoin substitute that can catch
up to it because it's established a kind
of Primacy given its track history of
reliability and its widespread
distribution that's part of the argument
for its Primacy
yes but I think it's more than that it's
not just you know um Coca-Cola and Pepsi
catching up to one another or McDonald's
and Burger King there is a fundamental
uh issue here which is that what you
would want the most in this kind of
digital currency because after all this
is all numbers and ones and zeros and
programmers can change it and so if your
programmers can change the consensus
parameters of the network which
basically all the other digital
currencies can do at will you know the
other digital currencies they have these
hard Forks which change the consensus
parameters quite frequently and
particularly the successful ones because
the way that you know they managed to
get successful was essentially through
active management and so they're more
like companies rather than uh private
protocols and the the key thing is as
you said there is a first mover
Advantage but there's also the problem
of the Immaculate Conception you know if
you make a new Bitcoin that's going to
start from scratch
um you break consensus parameters or you
start by imposing new consensus
parameters you're already you know not
starting with that Immaculate Conception
you're already starting with the idea
that there's somebody in charge and so
there's now it's not 200 coins there's
about 10 000 coins and if you've heard
about any of them other than Bitcoin
it's because there's a small group of
people that have been behind them and so
uh that as far as I'm concerned makes it
um highly unlikely that they would have
a monetary role because at the end of
the day you know what you appreciate
about Bitcoin what makes me pay
attention to bitcoin is that it is
neutral money that nobody can control so
you can see two banks in two different
countries
um use Bitcoin because that means they
don't need to resort to their own legal
uh system and their own central banks
and their own Regulators in order to
carry out this transaction because
Bitcoin is just neutral they know you
know you you it's it's like the an
engine you know you click the right
buttons and then the right smoke comes
out and it does the right uh transaction
that you want okay so I'm going to
recapitulate that for a moment so
because there's something in there too
that's that's quite difficult to
grasp quite difficult to believe apart
from the fact that the the technical
aspects are rather impenetrable for an
outsider
um this the way Bitcoin came about
seems it seems like a story that's
virtually impossible to believe you you
can't you can't you couldn't make it up
right so this unknown engineer Satoshi
Anonymous created this came up with this
idea that no one else had ever had
implemented it online
anonymized it and then vanished
essentially Without a Trace I mean how
much do people know about him are we
sure he's who invented it and what the
hell was he up to and why did this
happen and why should an outsider
believe any of this because it does seem
like the plot of a bad science fiction
novel
The I I will have confessed that I I did
used to think about this in similar
terms but I'll say this you know you use
the wheel every day but you don't know
who invented the wheel and we use a lot
of things every day that you you don't
use them because you trust the guy who
made them you use them because they have
a proven track record you know you've
spent your life seeing Wheels working
and so you're willing to trust a wheel
next time you get into a car so
um I think you know that's ultimately
what
um
in a sense it's kind of bad press for
Bitcoin but like a lot of things about
Bitcoin it actually ends up being
illustrating its strength yes this thing
has a story that you know PR person
would tell you just don't bother you
know start doing something else with
your life rather than try and sell this
thing
and he it doesn't need anybody to sell
it that's kind of the point it doesn't
have a story it doesn't have a PR person
and the fact that it has this kind of
ugly story where this person just came
in and didn't disappeared and who knows
what happened nobody really knows you
know maybe he died maybe he has other
things to keep him busy
um maybe he's incapacitated in some way
but ultimately it doesn't matter because
even if he were to come back today he
has no ability to control the network
any more than you and I can control it
you know he can control the quote that
he runs on his computer but at this
point the project is worth 10 years
without him so there's no reason why
anybody in Bitcoin is going to defer to
his judgment
um if he were to come back but besides
this you know I think the the key point
is that it works regardless of whether
this person is part of it or not
okay so I
fair enough I I understand that so
advantages of Bitcoin you contrast it oh
yeah a couple of questions advantages of
Bitcoin over fiat currency and both and
and that needs to be defined to fiat
currency and then I I'm also curious as
an outsider you're uh an advocate I
suppose of the Austrian School of
economics and there are a variety of
economic schools and maybe you could
briefly for everyone who's listening
outline the competing schools and what
the different propositions are and why
there are competing schools and why you
chose the Austrian School
okay
um I'll uh I'll say this I think the
main um the main split is between the
austrians and everybody else as far as
I'm concerned when it comes to the main
uh most important questions
because the austrians come at the
question from
um a different starting point which is
that value is subjective economic value
is subjective and that then leads to a
whole different uh intellectual path
with different methodologies and
different conclusions from what you get
from essentially everybody within the
mainstream and when I say the mainstream
you know that includes
um neoclassical economists Chicago
School economists to some extent
Keynesian economists and all other
different flavors and even Marxist
economists because on the Main and big
questions I think the austrians stand on
a completely different ground which is
value is subjective so therefore
economic calculation is something that
is done at an individual level and it is
something that cannot be done
objectively by a centralized Authority
which is the kind of physics envy that
has plagued mainstream economics
throughout the 20th Century so this
leads to a difference in methodology
leads to a difference in conclusions
which is if once you understand that
value is subjective you realize the best
person was able to achieve the important
values that matter to them is the person
themselves and so you you are more
likely to be sympathetic to ideas of
that give individuals more autonomy over
their own life in economic terms whereas
from the other schools it's a question
of what is the optimum policy and what
kind of policy should government be
using so
um you know the entire the questioning
of the entire premise of the need for
economic policy and for the need of
economic management by the government is
one important difference so if you're if
you're working within the parameters of
the Austrian economic school does that
tilt you so that tilts you more towards
appreciation of non-centerally
controlled distributed networks and and
and the emphasis on the individual actor
that's that's yes and to the mainstream
Economist this is you know uh
irredeemably ideological and
unscientific but you know to the
Austrian what's the Russian what's the
rationale for that though because it
seems precisely the opposite I mean if
you're if the because it seems to me but
that that's more grounded in a kind of
humility there's no way of of
determining once and for all what the
best thing is for the most people so
what we should try to do is establish
um institutions that distribute decision
making in as
I would it's an uncontrolled manner as
possible I suppose so so that's like a
rat in some sense that's is that a
radically free market approach that is
applied to all sorts of Institutions and
and the fundamental issue there is the
decentralization of decision-making
power absolutely and this is what you
know from the mainstream perspective
appears to be
um uh ridiculous because in their mind
you know the job of the economist is to
figure out how the government can fix
the economy you know get rid of
unemployment and eliminate uh wage
disparities and get rid of inequality
and all these other uh buzzwords that
appear to be you know profound economic
scientific thinking when really is just
Politics masquerading as
um science
um so and then so what how would a
mainstream Economist react to that kind
of statement if you were playing Devil's
Advocate to to help me understand how
they would criticize what what they say
is uh I think uh what they say is the
Austrian School made important
contributions up until the the first
world war to marginal analysis but then
the field Advanced mathematically you
know with the Improvement in
mathematical techniques that happen
around the world and with the
advancement of computers
um there became so much more room for
the application of mathematical and
quantitative methods into economics and
the Austrian School failed to keep up
with that and so they're still stuck in
the past writing essays shouting at the
clouds not making much sense whereas you
know the mainstream has moved on to this
Scientific Management which is you know
once you scratch under the surface you
realize there's very few differences
between modern macroeconomists
scientific management and erstwhile
socialist economists and Soviet
economists and their conception of
central planning it's uh in fact you
know one interesting anecdote Paul
Samuelson literally wrote The Textbook
on economics in post-world War II
America and the world and his uh
principles of economics textbook which
first came out in the 40s or 50s I don't
remember when was the first edition and
it continued to come out until his death
about 10 15 years ago up until the 1989
Edition the book had continuously when
discussing the Soviet economy the book
had continuously said the Soviet economy
will likely outperform the uh the U.S
economy and it will overtake the U.S
economy within the next few years and
there's a paper that is done that goes
through all of these different editions
and as Samuelson continues to move the
goal post you know they were supposed to
overtake the US in 68 but then by the
you know 65 Edition they're supposed to
take the US in 75 now and then New
Edition comes along and I don't remember
the exact dates but you know they kept
on kicking the cam downward down the
road while continuously you know not
challenging the essential idea which is
that Central planning of the economy
works and the Soviet Union is going to
do a better job than the us but their
defense against Central planning of the
economy is that it flies in the face of
democratic control of society and we
wouldn't want to infringe on people's
freedoms so for mainstream economists
the problem with Soviet economic
planning was that it necessitated you
know breaking a few eggs and putting a
few million people in gulags and that's
why we don't want it but it would work
and it would give us more GDP and so
this continued to be published in Paul
samuelson's textbooks up until 1989 uh
or 1990 or something like that you know
students were studying this in class as
the Soviet Union was collapsing and of
course you know this is Fiat Academia
Fiat World
um the next year they just take that
section out and they continue to print
the textbooks that continue to teach
kids in universities around the world
today that you know this is how
economics works the economics is
were you trained at Columbia as a
classical economist
yeah I took the foundational course for
economics at Columbia yeah so my PhD was
a sustainable development it wasn't
entirely economics but we took the
foundational courses of Economics
basically so why did you become a
deviant from that let's say what what
was your intellectual journey and I'm
I'm very curious about that
uh well
um so I my undergraduate background was
in mechanical engineering of all things
and in my PhD it was in sustainable
development and we were supposed to
study the issues of you know energy and
society and economics and approaches
From multidisciplinary perspective so my
engineering background and then my new
knowledge in economics gave me that kind
of what kayak calls the Fatal conceit of
I'm just going to pick a topic in
um in energy economics in and energy and
Engineering economics and you know study
it with the big brains of a Colombia PhD
and then figure out what needs to be
done basically
and then you know you can maintain these
Illusions until you actually start
digging into the spreadsheets and then
you start trying to actually
mathematically model the complex World
outside and put it on a spreadsheet on
your computer and then you start
realizing just how absurd these things
are you know the yeah well you'd think
if you could do that then you could put
the stock market on a spreadsheet and
run your economic Wizardry and gather
all the money in the world with your
capability to model the economic system
and predict and yet no one can do that
exactly so
so now
what one more comment about that I mean
I see that danger of that fatal conceit
lurking
underneath all the discussions of
climate change
does that seem like a reasonable
proposition to you because it's a
justification for Central planning
masquerading as a masquerading as well
we we have to save the planet we know
what's wrong with it and we know how to
fix it and our Solutions are going to
work and they're not going to produce
unintended consequences and it's so dire
that you need to leave us alone while we
do this and we know better than you do
exactly and that's that's exactly how I
essentially went off the reservation
because you know the topic of the course
the topic of the PHD in the topic of the
program was about how you can use this
kind of Scientific Management to solve
these big problems like climate change
and as I was studying in particular my
PhD was on the topic of biofuels so you
know ethanol and biodiesel which they
make from plants which is just an
absolutely insane abomination of the
humanity it's it's a saying that people
do this you know you you grow crops you
use a plant for a year to grow crops and
then to process them and then to turn
them into fuel when you can just get
fuel straight out of the earth and much
cheaper much more
and much better quality that doesn't
degrade the car and that doesn't destroy
the other soil and as I was studying
that I was on the one hand I was struck
by The Impossible complexity of the
question and then on the other hand I
was noticing the inescapable uh
conclusion that everything that they're
trying to do here is just making things
worse in fact you know the the idea was
that we're going to save the Earth from
climate change by replacing fossil fuels
with uh ethanol and biodiesel but the
reality was that you were chopping down
the Amazon and Indonesian Palm forests
and to turn them into the sterile
farming land the Midwest and the
Mississippi Valley over the US was
essentially degraded from all of its
soil and then the um the fertilizer that
is just running off from the Mississippi
is causing all these enormous damage to
the Gulf of Mexico it's it's it's it's
insane how much damage is being done
from this attempt to sort of centrally
plan things from above and Hayek has a
saying where he says you know we used to
suffer from problems we now suffer from
Solutions and this let me ask you about
that like look I've been struck by
exactly this problem right this is the
problem and intended consequences and
the irreducible complexity of things so
like we can talk about climate change
the problem of climate change but there
isn't those words are unbelievably
deceiving
because there isn't a problem of climate
change there's a hundred and fifty
thousand problems of climate change and
every single one of those is an
unbelievably difficult problem and the
solutions to those problems could well
exist in terrible contradiction to one
another
and so but you get diluted you think
well climate change well I can
understand that the climate that's easy
to say I must be able to conceptualize
that of course you can't
and then
and then it hides the fact that it hides
this under structure of complexity now
you got a glimpse of that and that
instill
in you this resistance to this fatal
conceit it instilled in you some
humility why doesn't that happen to
other people and why did it happen to
you
um that's a good question
um I don't know
um I think uh I don't know different
people they react in different ways I
just um I have an insatiable curiosity
to continue to try and understand this
question whereas what I needed to do was
to just
um sit down and run a bunch of equations
on a spreadsheet and say that this is
the model and um you know as long as the
thing was internally consistent then it
gets the uh pass and then you get the
degree maybe it was your training as an
engineer yes I think actually that is a
very good point yeah yeah because
Engineers they really like it yeah
Engineers really like to build things
that work exactly and you can't hide the
fact like you have to trace the the
whole thing and how it works and you try
and put you you have to conceptualize it
in your brain and it has to make sense
you know think of the Rube Goldberg
machine whatever it is you have to
follow it through and then you need to
figure out where it breaks and so
thinking of trying trying to approach
you know something as complex as the
global energy Market as an engineer
approaches something like an engine you
know a single engine exactly that's the
faithful conceit because the engine is a
product of human design it's a product
of human constructive design somebody
sat there with a pen and paper or
computer program and designed this
engine and then they iterated on it but
things that our societal institutions
are the products of Human Action and not
human design you know we don't nobody
sat down and designed the global energy
Market everybody out there is helping
shape the global energy Market every day
with their consumption decisions and
with their production decisions and
everybody's kind of reacting to
everybody else's actions in this kind of
Global Dance that we all do together
that ends up you know rewarding the
better ideas and punishing the worst
ideas and nobody knows how it's going to
evolve that's ultimately
um you know mises critique of socialism
is primarily about property rights it's
it's the issue of calculation without
property rights it's impossible for
people who don't own resources and who
don't have an opportunity cost
to the use of resources to accurately
and rationally estimate what is the best
use of those resources it has to be real
you know it means it has a beautiful
quote he says you know capital is not a
play it's not play pretend or something
along those lines it's not a game where
you can just let's pretend that this is
my Capital I'm going to allocate it no
it it has to be worth what it actually
is worth to you individually so that the
decision has the uh the weight yes the
full weight of the reward and the full
cost you have to feel in order to be
able to understand the decision if you
don't own it then you don't understand
the cost and you don't understand
um and you can't make that decision so
that's one hand that it's the property
rights and calculation critique and then
on the other hand there's the
entrepreneurship critique which is even
if we manage to let's say take over a
capitalist functioning society and turn
it into social society today
it has no possibility for accommodating
change it has no possibility for making
change happen because it has no
mechanism for consumers to impose their
preferences for quality and uh quantity
of goods that they want on the producers
right so there's no there's no way of
gathering information about the state of
the market
absolutely yeah
and about the future and this is the
creation role of the entrepreneur
because the entrepreneurs plays a
central role in Austrian economics but
not in mainstream economics because in
Austrian economics you know the
entrepreneur is the one who foresees
possibilities and most entrepreneurs are
likely wrong perhaps maybe most or maybe
close to most they're wrong about what
they foresee in the world but some of
them are the ones who build that right
well then there's a there's a darwinian
issue there too because look part of the
rationale for evolution for the for the
uh what would you say for
understanding
why the idea of evolution is necessarily
true in some sense is exactly the
problem of the complexity of the future
it's unpredictable in principle
you're not going to get smart enough to
predict it that's never going to happen
it may be that would partly be be
because if you built a machine that was
smart enough to predict that the
existence of a machine that smart would
change the way that the Future Would
manifest itself in a way that that
machine couldn't predict and so the way
Evolution solves that problem is that
it produces
it's like there's a million one mosquito
gives rise to a million mosquitoes but
every mosquito doesn't produce a
successful million Offspring we'd be
like knee-deep in mosquitoes in no time
hardly any of those mosquitoes live
and they've the ones that live vary a
little bit from their parents in some
unforeseen Direction
and if you get enough of that production
of unforeseen variants then
some of those unforeseen variants
can match the unforeseeable future and
that's how that's exactly how
entrepreneurs work is most entrepreneurs
fail
and then when you look at successful
entrepreneurs you see that most of their
ideas failed
and so what you do is over produce and
cull and that's not the same as logical
prediction now there is some role that
intelligence plays right because by All
Things Considered you'd hope that more
intelligent entrepreneurs you would
predict that more intelligent
entrepreneurs have a higher probability
of success than less intelligent
entrepreneurs but it isn't necessarily
because they're better able to foresee
the future you know it might be that
they're making better rational decisions
of the sort of rational decision that
intelligence can make but so it's very
interesting to me that you say that the
so the entrepreneurs in some sense their
function is to keep the system
modifying itself
to keep up with the transforming present
that we call the future
that's the role of the entrepreneur and
even psychologically that's the case
they're high in openness and open people
psychologically over produce ideas
they're fascinated by ideas and they
tend to be they have high verbal fluency
they have high fluency in the ability to
generate images so for example someone
who's creative if you say to someone
creative write down as many words as you
can that begin with the letter s in
three minutes the creative people will
on average outperform the uncreative
people that's and that's a consequence
of trade openness and that's a
consequence in part of its association
with high levels of G
fluid intelligence so it's just speed in
some sense and there's also very
the other thing that the creative people
do is they'll produce more Divergent
answers how many different uses can you
think of for a brick
you score that by number of uses
generated but then also by the
Rarity of the use that's specified extra
points so to speak are given for that so
so the so the way that nature solves the
problem of the unpredictability of the
future even within human psychological
functioning is by over production and
culling not by rational prediction
yes and um you know one thing I think
it's popper who said this uh but it may
be apocryphally uh attributed to him but
it is to predict the wheel is to invent
the wheel that's I think the issue of
prediction like we're to predict the
future is to basically try and predict
what the future of knowledge is and
we're at the limit of our knowledge
right now so
um you know the invention of the wheel
was a new thing you had to actually
invent it in order to be able to predict
it because you didn't even know that it
was possible before you uh before it was
invented and this is ultimately well
something something new is by definition
outside of your domain of knowledge it
might even be outside the axiomatic
structure of your domain of knowledge if
it's new enough and so it's
unpredictable by definition or it
wouldn't be new
and it doesn't matter you know the
creativity is not uh you know it's not
like you can pick the 100 most creative
people in the country and then put them
in a room and tell them come up with all
the creative things
um the whole point is that it's it it's
a living ecosystem in which the
creativity is what makes the new ideas
and these are these ideas are tested in
the real world you know they either sink
or swim in the real world of the market
and it's it's it's specifically their
you know sinking or swimming is what
determines their success because that's
all that matters so you need those
people to be out there in every field of
life in order to be able to innovate in
those fields you can't just isolate it
and so A system that is built on Central
planning and this this is one of the
critiques that mises has leveled at
socialism exactly a century ago 1922 he
wrote his book socialism and until today
I don't think there has been a single
socialist that has actually
um Illustrated their ability to
comprehend this point and still disagree
with it like they they all just
completely ignore it it's not something
that anybody they grapple with his ideas
on property rights and they made some
attempts to refute him and failed in my
opinion but on the entrepreneurship
Point there's almost complete silence
because there's no way that you can
square the idea of letting you know
every uh every Workshop worker have the
opportunity to create and innovate
something new and try it out because
they have their own money and then they
start their own shop you know there's no
way that you can square that with having
a committee that decides all these
workshops that are doing this unless
this line of business the all of their
Capital all of their work all of their
structure all of their
um everything that they do has to be
decided by Central Authority those two
things are fundamentally incompatible
so we're still walking through
the Bitcoin standard at least in some
sense shall we talk more about the Fiat
standard the book that you've just
released and so let's talk first of all
tell everybody what constitutes a fiat
currency and contrast that with Bitcoin
and and and have at or
all right so let me just conclude with
one more thing about the standard and
the Austrian school because I think it's
a good recap of everything we've
discussed so far which is that um you
know practically speaking the men where
the rubber hits the road in terms of the
difference between the austrians and
everybody else is in the uh free market
conception of money versus the status
conception of money this is where you
know the two World Views are the most
Divergent because from the mainstream
perspective everybody in the mainstream
you know the money is the creation of
the state and the only question is what
is the state's role in the management of
money but from the Austrian perspective
money is a product of the market and the
state
um not the money is not the invention of
the state and the state's meddling in
money is actually not just uh
not just you know irrational in the
sense of it can't succeed for all the
reasons that uh socialist Central
planning cannot succeed it's also at the
root of the cause it's also the root
cause of the majority of economic
problems that all economists are
concerned with so once you and I've and
I heard your discussion with uh Robert
Murphy who did a great job explaining
the business cycle it's the it's the
corruption of money that ultimately
leads to the business cycle and up until
Bitcoin came about this was an
interesting
um philosophical discussion and economic
and academic discussion uh but there was
very few there were very few Austrian
economists and the majority of everybody
just went along with what the mainstream
thought but the absolutely fascinating
thing about Bitcoin one of the many
fascinating things about Bitcoin is that
it is a live experiment in this question
here we go we have a form of money that
is not produced by the state not
regulated by the state not controlled by
the state
and it's functioning as a form of money
and it tests you know it it it's
continued survival refutes the state
theory of money and uh perhaps even more
deliciously it refutes the inflationist
theories of money which all of these
other schools are inflationists you know
they all argue about how much the money
supply should increase and how should
the money supply increase and who should
be in charge of the money supply
increase but none of them has ever
questioned the fundamental proposition
which is the money supply should not
increase does not have to increase and
if we so why did they presume that it
should increase
um I mean
intellectually you know the whole uh
field is shaped from the perspective of
how should the government manage the
money successfully and so there's no way
that you as somebody who's getting paid
from the increase of the supply there's
no you know the the Overton window of
acceptable answers for you through
self-censorship uh more than uh or
intellectual capture is you know how do
we increase the money supply but you
know if there's no money supply increase
you most likely don't get a salary
because your job is linked to that
printer and essentially I think you know
an a less charitable interpretation by
an Austrian Economist of a mainstream
Economist is that they're essentially
Court Jesters for the inflationary
central banks the central banks need an
intellectual apparatus that gets on TV
and says you know we have to print all
this money in order to uh prevent
unemployment from happening and to
prevent bad things from happening but
really uh I think you know the bigger
story here is the money print thing of
course is highly lucrative for
governments and so of course governments
are highly favorable of people who want
that so Bitcoin is powerful in this
regard because a um you know
economically it's succeeding and
intellectually it's succeeding as well I
think it's a massive challenge to the
mainstream economics establishment their
complete inability to explain it or to
try and prevent present and a coherent
explanation for why it behaves the way
it does or why it grows is absolutely
astonishing you know it's been there for
12 years it's worth a trillion dollars
right now and the vast majority of
University professors will tell you oh
it's just a tulip somehow they're
convinced that the fact that you know
um Agricultural Product prices went up
for a few months in Amsterdam in the
17th century somehow invalidates the
fact that we have a form of money that
travels internationally and is hard and
is completely outside the state the
state the control of the state it's it
it it's argument might sound bite almost
they haven't even given it much thought
because there's not much to say it's
argument by dismissive analogy
yes which is very common also in the uh
climate change discussion as you always
uh notice
yeah you see I mean it's not that I I
spend a lot of time looking at the
climate change literature and and
considering solutions for various
reasons and I can never stop being more
afraid of the solutions than the problem
and it's not like I'm not afraid of the
problem it's conceivable that human
activity is producing global climate
change I think the evidence for that
seems to be relatively robust although
the economic how economically
consequential that will be is subject to
tremendous debate because it's
prediction out 100 years or 50 years and
like good luck with that boys and girls
but the solutions terrify me
so and in fact I discussed this in the
Fiat standard uh okay I use this as a as
an uh as an example of how Fiat corrupts
the planet basically so um in in the
Bitcoins that a lot of Bitcoin stand was
about government money but uh you could
always say more because it's just been
so enormously important over the last
hundred years so in the Fiat standard I
take the same kind of analytical lens
that I used in the Bitcoin standard to
look at Bitcoin which was you know when
I started writing that book it was this
obscure thing that only a bunch of
weirdos on the internet had heard about
and I tried to kind of come at the same
uh with the same kind of lens at the
Fiat system and trying to ignore all the
hoopla of a century of propaganda and
academic work yeah well I you know
sorry your discussion already has made
me aware of all sorts of axioms of my
thought that I didn't know I had
so for example I basically just accepted
in some sense
on faith the idea that
money is
the governments fundamentally the money
I know we all have our money and we own
it but
it's a state
construct that's why each country has
its own currency and so one of the
functions of the government is to deal
with money and the idea that you could
abstract that away from the government
any government any conceivable
government
conceivably forever or at least forever
as far as we're concerned it's hard to
rap it's hard to wrap my head around how
radical an idea that is
I I don't know what that would mean if
it was actually true
and so
and I the idea that
I mean the arguments that you've
presented
that suggests that the notion that
government control of that the
government has valid control over money
and maybe that that should be subject in
some sense to the Democratic process
rather than the market process
you know it's going to take me a long
time to think that through because that
really is a radical
it's unbelievably radical proposition
yes that's kind of why the austrians are
kind of uh ostracized and considered
outside the pale on this issue but think
about it you know no government declared
gold as money gold emerged as money all
over the world independently because of
its uh because of its properties and
then governments had to use gold in
their own currencies in order to give
their currencies value you know if you
wanted your uh picture on a coin and you
wanted that coin to circulate and for
people to hold it and appreciate it you
have to make that coin out of gold you
couldn't just make coins out of anything
and give it to people and when people
try to do that uh hilarity and Calamity
ensued in uh every case you know we have
a long history of what happens when
governments debase currency and uh you
know it always happens in the same way
they begin by making sound money they
they specify the weight and they make it
uniform but then they almost always I
think all every example in history has
ended up with them is Lisa coming to the
temptation to increase the supply if it
was paper money backed by gold or to
what they used to do previously which is
a mix and base Metals
wasn't it the case that the the ridges
on these edges of coins were there
because the coins were shaved by
slightly and was that a government was
that a state function or were people
doing that to coins I'm sorry I just
this is just an example of how that
solid uh uncorruptable currency can be
you know if you get a gold coin you can
you can scrape some of the gold off and
if you have enough gold coins you can
make a nice pile of gold dust and the
gold coins still work but you have the
gold and so there's various ways of
doing that and I read that the ridges on
the outside of coins why do they have
them they
do you know is that the case or am I
just chasing something that's not the
case at all do you I I think I've heard
stories like that yeah there's so many
stories historically of governments
finding creative ways of debasing their
currencies you know the most common one
is oh no some people are making fake
currency so give us all of your currency
so we can mint it again into a new form
so that we can make sure that it's uh
right and then you get your currency
back and then it has five percent less
gold than it used to have that's that
was kind of the quantitative easing that
they did before and that they take some
of the gold for themselves
um so that that is always that
Temptation has always been there and
Bitcoin is essentially the most powerful
defensive technology against that it's
it's uh it's an enormous Quantum Leap
Forward in the technology of money as as
protection of value
against predation and against inflation
because you know the you you don't have
to worry about whether the coin has base
metal inside it you can verify
everything for the Bitcoin and um it's
it's uh it's fully auditable everybody
can see every single transaction and uh
everybody can verify the rules of the
network so it's the most powerful
technology that we have for money and I
think it's it's a natural fit to anybody
who's productive and wants to save their
value into the future and it's not just
a fit for them I think the beautiful
thing about it is that it is uh it's a
great reward for them it's a great
reward for those people to go and
um you know save into the future and
this is why I think Bitcoin is uh uh is
is so
transformative to the individual because
it
um gives you a better way of saving for
the future and I think this is something
I discuss extensively in the Bitcoin
standard I think that's uh highly
related to the time preference of
individuals which is an enormously
important topic so historically all
throughout human history you know we're
always moving to a harder money because
we're looking for a better form of money
and that culminated by the end of the
19th century with everybody in the world
being on the classical gold standard
basically the entire planet was on the
same currency
now one money chosen on the market are
very hard to produce holding on to its
value offering anybody in the world the
ability to save further future
essentially for free you know you get
paid in the coin you keep the coin safe
and then 20 years later that coin is not
only held on to its value it's likely
appreciated more because in those 20
years we've made more cars more houses
more apples more oranges more everything
but we haven't made a lot more gold so
the gold coins remains valuable and so
historically you see this has coincided
with a decline in interest rates which
from the Austrian perspective is a
measure of time preference time
preference is what determines the
interest rate and time preference is the
degree of discounting for the future so
effectively as long as we're using
harder and harder money we're being able
to provide for the future better and
that's reducing our uncertainty of the
future you know now you're you can be
fairly confident that the money that you
worked for today that you can save it
and it'll be there for you in five years
time when you start thinking more about
yourself in five years time and as our
technology for money has improved and
has our ability to save is improved our
time Horizon is expanded our time
preferences dropped we start thinking
more and more about the future that
encourages us to say encourages us to
save more to invest more and then that
leads to capital accumulation which
leads to the increase in productivity
and I think the whole world was
basically lowering its time preference
until the early 20th century and then in
the early 20th century this is kind of
the central argument of the Fiat
standard by switching to an easy money
where now you know in the 20th century
we moved to government money which has
been increasing on average I calculate
at something like roughly 14 a year
globally so you move from a money supply
that's being inflated in one or two
percent as the average human being in
the world you had that same gold coin
now you're stuck with your government's
local script that is inflating at on
average 14 you know some people have
witnessed 200 inflation okay so so that
on average so you said worldwide if you
just took Western democracies into
account say relatively stable societies
with relatively admirable forms of
government what sort of inflation rate
are you looking at uh do you know that
yeah I've done the numbers in the Fiat
standard the lowest averages you'll see
uh are in the US Switzerland Denmark and
Sweden and they're about six to seven
percent per year over the last 50 60
years so that's really As Good As It
Gets for Fiat as a kind of average so
you're constantly you know so you need a
return of six percent or seven percent
just to keep up
basically yeah and you know seven
percent is is not nothing seven percent
means you basically lose half the value
stored in ten years and that's seven
percent that's in the good cases there
are countries that have had an average
of 200 because you know they had years
in which the money supply went up
tenfold within one year and that that
has happened so you think about the
examples of people living in a
hyperinflationary societies and I used
to live in Lebanon until recently and
you see that when the currency collapses
you know think about the stories about
Weimar Germany or about um any Latin
American country or Lebanon or Zimbabwe
when you hear about their inflation you
know the the stories are of people that
have been reduced to very very very uh
short-term thinking your money you get
paid on the beginning of the month your
money is going to be worth half of its
price by the end of its by the end of
the month so you get paid and you run
straight to the supermarket I remember I
was a kid growing up in Brazil and I
remember that you know on the first day
of the month the supermarkets would be
overrun and there would be people
fighting and things would be crazy
because everybody's trying to get things
now before everybody else gets their
paycheck and buys everything and then
bids of the price so your time Horizon
is shortened when your money is losing
its value okay so let me let me ask okay
let me ask you a question about that
then too so
one of the
problems that the people who are
concerned about the environment and
about global warming are are trying to
solve is they're trying to increase our
sense of caring for
let's call it the planet the environment
right Global concern think globally act
locally you're supposed to be taking all
these other things into account and not
consuming like a madman and despoiling
the planet but implicit in your argument
as far as I can tell is that if you
stabilize the currency so it can't be
inflated and you make people's time
Horizon much longer that they're going
to be concerned about a far greater
variety of things that are distal from
them like the environment
because they can
they're now able to do that instead of
having to fight for short-term emergency
survival continually exactly exactly
that's it that's so the more Capital you
accumulate the more you can provide for
the future the more you can secure the
present and start thinking about the
future you know one more you care about
the future then in some sense or can
care about it
and and and you know you think about it
like the the fisherman who's able to
move toward building a fishing boat and
a fishing rod you know they're able to
now rest assured that any day they just
need a small amount of time to go out
and catch the fish it's not like the
days when they had nothing and they had
to try and catch them with their hands
every day and so some days you might not
be able to even catch anything so now
your survival is more secure and so you
start thinking more about the future and
money is an incredible technology for
that for lowering our time preference
that's kind of one of my central
arguments in the Fiat standard that
money is the best mechanism we have for
moving value to the Future because we
know you could save a fishing boat and
you can save something else but you
don't know what's going to happen in the
future and you don't know if you want to
move away from where you are money
itself is enormously important because
it's very useful you save some money and
then doesn't matter what happens in your
town you take the money and you can go
away so it protects you against the
uncertainty of the future and when that
money is compromised your ability to
think of the future as massively
compromised as well and I think you know
the hyperinflationary examples are an
extreme example of that but I think the
20th century itself was one Global
um slow train wreck of watching
Humanity's time preference rise as you
know generation after generation of
people all over the world witnessed
their currency devalued everybody saw it
there isn't the single people in the
world that have escaped this you know it
doesn't matter if you live in Western
Europe or Africa or Latin America
everybody has been screwed by inflation
in the 20th century and everybody has a
story in their family about somebody who
saved up and worked hard and diligently
and then one day they woke up and all
their money was gone and all the wealth
that they worked for was gone everybody
has gone through this and it it leaves a
mark it leaves a mark it tells you you
know don't be the sucker who saves for
tomorrow because you know you missed out
on all you see like in in in in Weimar
Germany you think about the people who
are punished by that hyperinflation
those were people who were productive
and who and who had foresight because
they put away something for the future
it the ants were published punished not
the grasshoppers
you know exactly and that's a terrible
thing to do to a society to take the
most creative people who also have the
ability to delay gratification and then
to just cut them off at the knees for
daring to to do both of those things you
couldn't do a worse thing to a society
in some sense than that to punish people
for for for creativity productivity in
the capacity to save instead of the
pursuit of impulsive pleasure so it is
really a catastrophe
and so absolutely is and and maybe
that's not much improved when it's a
slow train wreck rather than a quick one
I mean who knows right so
um all right yeah I mean the speed has
varied but I think
um this has been the story of the 20th
century and on the flip side of it which
is kind of the the two sides of the
story that I tell in the Fiat standard
on the one hand you know you had
individual productive people and
businesses having their wealth robbed
from them continuously throughout the
20th century because it's constantly
devaluing and on the other hand you had
government bureaucracies being given
essentially unlimited financing to do
whatever they want because they were
connected to the printing press and all
that you needed was to just have the
right story in the ear of the right
person to get the printing press to run
for you and so you know not only are you
punishing the most productive people in
society and the people that are the best
at saving for the future and thinking in
the future you're also essentially
rewarding heavily people who are good at
playing politics and uh people who can
you know get into government and people
who can use government power because you
are giving those people Unlimited power
so naturally you're going to our prime
minister our prime minister managed to
get a billion dollars into the hands of
one of the Charities he's associated
with yes I've heard of that your prime
minister has been an excellent lesson in
um what happens when the seemingly
idealist people with beautiful sounding
cliches get into power and then uh have
that power foisted upon them and then
um they they seen a great opportunity to
capitalize on that to their own benefit
and to their own aggrandizement
um the you know the and all the while
justifying it by reference to their
their their the moral standards they
hold that exceed those of everyone else
absolutely absolutely and then you know
you think about it first so there's the
aspect of the corruption of the fact
that you know um playing politics pays
but then there's the other aspect which
to go back to the energy discussion and
the food discussion which I uh discussed
in the Fiat standard these markets then
become heavily regulated and influenced
by a government that has an infinite
printing press to the point where
um that they've been made almost
dysfunctional at this point so uh if you
think in in terms of energy we've had
and and in both energy and food you know
the the current hysteria that you hear
around oh no we're going to boil the
oceans uh because we're driving cars or
you know we're going to boil the ocean
because we're eating cows and cows are
farting and you know four and a half
billion years of Earth was doing fine
until the cows started to fart and now
the whole earth is going to hell
um both of these hysterians incidentally
have their roots in the inflation of the
1970s it was when the prices of food and
energy Rose in the 1970s that all these
cranky cookie ideas is about you know
Earth punishing us and there's not
enough uh resources for us to be able to
live and we need to limit the global
population and we're destroying the
Earth all that stuff started to come
about in the 1970s and it was highly
politically
um conducive at that point it was likely
to be popular because it was providing a
very useful Alibi to the government when
it comes to inflation you know the
reason we're witnessing massive
increases in the price of oil and food
has nothing to do with the fact that
your currency is being printed in
debased it's because we've reached the
natural carrying limits of the earth and
we're going to boil the oceans and we're
going to destroy the planet and so you
know you need to repent by moving away
from consuming
hydrocarbon energy you know oil and gas
and coal and all of those things that
made our modern world and the things
that are the reason that we have our
modern world and modern technology we
can't live without them they're 80
percent of energy consumption around the
globe and
um that's not declining in any
meaningful sense anytime soon unless we
want to go back to pre-industrial
societies and so you know by Fiat we've
uh tried to that we fought these energy
sources for 50 years and subsidized
these feel good uh essentially
pre-industrial unworkable Technologies
which rely on biomass so biofuels that's
an example you know you're burning
plants like your ancestors 500 years ago
I had to do in order to survive or wind
which again you know your ancestors
could use occasionally but it didn't
build them it didn't build an apple uh
computers and didn't build the internet
and solar energy which you know also
we've always used but again it won't
build you a car
um in order to have all these modern
conveniences that we have we need those
energies and people in the Fiat world
are completely dissociated from this
reality they almost wanted they almost
want to overrule thermodynamics by Fiat
that we just wanna we wanna have the
same cars better cars but we don't want
them to run on fuels we want them to run
on
wind and solar and all that and the
result of that I think you know when I
was doing my PhD I saw this for the
grift that it was
um and I was not interested in it
intellectually because you know who
cares a bunch of people like Al Gore are
going to become billionaires from this
but you know a lot of hucksters get rich
in a lot of ways uh no reason to get
worked up but now I think I'm beginning
to realize this is actually a serious
serious
threat to industrialization and
civilization itself I mean our planet
will witness massive catastrophes and
calamities if reduction if we have a
serious reduction in the consumption of
these energy sources which you know
plants are being decommissioned all over
the world based on the idea that we're
going to be replacing it with wind and
solar and the result is Energy prices
are rising massively and
um uh you know energy is becoming less
and less reliable and you're witnessing
more and more grid failures
yeah
all right so on to the Fiat standard yes
so in the Fiat standard looking at the
uh looking at the way that the Fiat
money works as um you know from first
principles trying to understand how it
works I think that the the fundamental
idea is that in the Fiat system the way
that you mind a new currency into
existence is through Lending
you you when you when your bank makes a
new loan they don't take somebody else's
money and give it to you they make new
money essentially out of thin air and
they hand it to you and they put it in
your bank account so this I think is a
very key Insight so in Bitcoin we have
to walk through that so everyone
understands exactly what the banks are
doing because that is not something that
people know or understand
yeah so it's it's not like there's a
fixed sum of money that the bank has to
deal with where and you know they need
to get depositors money and then they
need to lend it out to borrowers if you
have a lending license if you're a bank
you're licensed by your local Central
Bank the mere fact that you have that
lending license means that you can issue
loans and
um essentially create new money and add
new money to the money supply and put it
in your uh client's bank account so now
obviously they can't just do this
limitlessly there are regulations and
rules by the central bank that determine
how much lending is done and so what are
the rules approximately
well the rules is you know the person
who borrows has to have a good uh credit
uh history and good credit standing and
a good idea good reason for why they
want to borrow it but obviously these
things are getting
um less and less strict over time as uh
monetary expansion picks up and
political pressure for more and more
monetary expansion increases so that
with the housing with the housing
crash yeah yeah housing is one example
but I think you know perhaps the even
bigger example is the financial industry
which is constantly receiving enormous
amounts of uh new credit from the
Central Bank directly in the form of
quantitative easing that's a huge one
so you know in in Bitcoin we have
Bitcoin mining which is an extremely uh
sophisticated industry in order to
produce new Bitcoins you know we have
about six and a quarter Bitcoins
produced every 10 minutes and
um in order to produce these people
expend a lot of resources in order to be
able to make them roughly the cost of
making a Bitcoin fluctuates around the
market price of Bitcoin but both vary
but it's roughly around it with gold the
same is true as well you know it's it's
costly inexpensive to find new gold we
have to dig in you have to process it
and it's uh there okay so so so why
bother minding it and why not just cap
Bitcoin where it is now why bother
producing more why is that built into
the system why 21 million and not just
where we are now well 21 million is as
good as any number it could have been
500 trillion it could have been five it
could have been anything
um any number is good enough as long as
it's divisible and that's kind of the
key Insight from the austrians that made
me specifically very interested in
Bitcoin austrians were the only one who
said yeah the quantity of money doesn't
matter you could run any economy on any
size of the money and then as the as the
economy grows the value of the money
increases and that's a great thing
that's that's the golden period That's
the Golden Age so it's sort of an it's
sort of an illusion in some sense the
cap because well there's 21 million
Bitcoin let's say but they could be
worth anywhere from like two dollars to
a
a million dollars each and because it's
it's fractionable
right so so there is no inside in that
sense there's no limit to how much money
there is even though there is a limit to
how many tokens there are exactly
there's no limit to the value that the
network can carry but there's a limit to
the uh tokens that represent that value
so you don't corrupt the tokens of the
system in order to make more tokens in
order to enrich the Insiders you just
keep packing more value into it into the
tokens okay so why why why are they why
was it allowed to be mined at all then
so that the distribution of the coins
would be a fair distribution so that
anybody could enter into the network and
secure coins because that you know if if
you just made the first 21 million you
know who owns them in the first day
who's going to be owning the 21 million
how are you going to distribute them
this is not an easy question and I think
you know most people
most people uh wouldn't have thought
something like Bitcoin to be possible
had it not because of this issue you
know how are you going to start off an
upstart currency and give everybody in
the world a new balance so it was to get
it going
exactly it's you know it's kind of like
just for the first 130 years of
bitcoin's History we're gonna need to
have mining but then Bitcoin operates
without any more mining right so you
have some you need some gold for gold to
work and so you need to have a mechanism
for mining the gold and so this is some
mechanism for producing Bitcoin so that
there are some Bitcoins so it can work
and they're distributed across the
people who have done the mining and so
you already have a bit of an economy
there because all those people are
vested in it and it's completely open
and perfectly competitive anybody in the
world can mine anybody can bring their
computer onto the network in line and
you know
um benefit from The Mining and it's it
rewards only the most uh successful
miners it was only the most economic
minus because it has this thing called
the difficulty adjustment which is
um my favorite part of Bitcoin it it's
really the magic glue that holds Bitcoin
together and I discuss it in the Bitcoin
standard and in the Fiat standard
um what happens is that uh you know if
more miners try and mine copper or gold
or silver you end up with a lot more
copper or so gold or silver but with
Bitcoin the more miners that get into
the network you still get the same
number of Bitcoin as was predetermined
earlier
but the difference is that you don't get
uh but but it just gets harder for the
individual miners to uh get into the
network so it's it's more like a sports
competition wherein there's one Trophy
and then the more competitors get in the
trophy just gets harder to win it
doesn't get uh you don't get more
trophies handed out so how how in the
world did Satoshi figure this out how
did he I don't understand how he could
conceptualize this it just doesn't make
sense to me it's an incredible work of
Genius when you think about just the the
amount of uh expertise that he had to
have in different fields of knowledge to
bring this monster together is
absolutely astounding yeah well just
just the conceptualization to begin with
let alone the in the implementation the
engineering implementation it's to be
fair I mean this is it wasn't like he
invented this problem it's it's a
problem that had been around for many
decades people have been trying to build
a digital form of money for decades you
know since the 1970s and 80s and 90s
there had been attempts to do something
like this and the
um you know the different attempts to
produce something like this always came
up against uh a technical problem called
the Byzantine generals problem and then
Satoshi figured out a solution to it
through the proof of work system which
is absolutely astounding
so tell tell me about that that sounds
if we can do that without deviating too
much so what is that problem and how did
he solve it
um well the problem is uh essentially
about how to get all the different uh
nodes on the network to agree on the
same version of what's going to happen
together you know how that how do they
all agree without having a Central
Command Authority that's really the
issue so
um and why was that the Byzantine
General's problem
you know
ashamed to say it but I'm not I'm very
much up on my history I'm not sure where
the history of the term comes from okay
okay well I won't torture you with that
then but but he solved solved the
problem of consensus verification
without a central Authority exactly and
the way to do it was to have this
expensive uh ritual called proof of work
being performed before any of the
members of the network proposes a block
of transactions to be added onto the
record of transactions so Bitcoin is um
you know it's a record of transactions
that exist over tens of thousands of
computers and the issue is how do you
how do you make sure that people don't
put in fake transactions in this record
well the way he did it was that anybody
anywhere in the world could come in and
propose new transactions but in order to
have your transactions added you must
first solve this problem this
mathematical problem the proof of work
mathematical problem and that's actually
expensive to solve you know it takes
your computer running for many many
hours to be able to try and figure out
solution to those things and you know
for it to get lucky once every 10
minutes so you have to spend serious
money in order to be able to commit to
make the claim of the new transactions
and so once you know it's like
if you just allow everybody to present
their record of transactions then
there's no mechanism of coordinating
between everybody whose record do we
pick from all those thousands of people
but if you put currently you know the
reward is about six uh six and a half
seven Bitcoin so that's about 350 000
the Bitcoin network is giving out 350
000 every 10 minutes
you can have them as long as you provide
the proof of work solution which roughly
costs you around 350 000 more or less so
how do we make sure that we can all
agree on this uh all the members of the
network we don't evaluate any claim for
the transactions we only evaluate the
claim that has done the work and that
has spent the money so why would why
would someone make that claim then if
it's so difficult what's the advantage
to that you get 350 000 you get six to
seven Bitcoins
and how is that how is that related
that's the mining process that's the
mining that is the mining process that
is the mind okay good okay oh my God
that's the mining process exactly so to
mine new Bitcoins you have to solve that
problem so this is why it's portrayed as
minings like those computers are digging
in the ground trying to find the
solution of the
um mathematical problem it costs money
to be able to arrive at that Solution on
average around 350 000 currently at
current prices
um so that's in order to be able to make
a claim to get that you know your claim
doesn't get looked at unless you've
solved the problem and it's very cheap
for everybody on the network to see that
you have the right solution to the
problem but it's very expensive to
arrive at that solution so the solution
is like this very difficult key to find
but once you've found it it's trivial to
verify that this is the right key
because you just put it in the lock and
it works so it's instantaneous and very
cheap for members of the network to
figure out that this thing is correct so
you set up this massive hurdle
essentially if anybody wants to come and
get this reward they first need to spend
why wouldn't they just buy Bitcoin it
seems to be to be a lot simpler than
mining it then if it costs 350 000 to
make 350 000 why bother with the mining
big you know you said it rewards more
efficient people
exactly the short answer is if you have
a way of securing electricity at less
than five cents per kilowatt hour then
um you should get into Bitcoin mining
business uh which is you know lower than
most rates everywhere in the world so if
you have a source of energy that is
isolated then from the Grid or if you
have a cheap way of securing energy then
Bitcoin is a great uh weight mining
Bitcoin is great but for the most so
does that mean that Bitcoin is a very
good way of moving resources from places
that can produce electricity very
cheaply to other places where
electricity is more expensive does that
actually make the electricity the cheap
electricity it makes the cheap
electricity much more valuable
absolutely it's uh this is a weird
that's a weird thing it's it's very
weird I think it's going to have a very
profound impact on the global energy
Market because For the first time in
history we have a way to sell energy
that is location independent so a lot of
places in the world have a lot of energy
but it's very expensive to get that to
the population Center so the north of
Canada mother hasn't so you don't need
wires
exactly Jesus that's weird that's a
really strange thing yeah to get
electricity from the north of Ontario to
Toronto re needs a lot of wires or you
need to you know if it was gas you need
to put it on tankers or on trains or in
pipelines all of that stuff is pretty
expensive but with Bitcoin you just need
an internet connection you take the
Bitcoin miners to where that energy is
and then you can monetize that energy
and turn it into Bitcoin It's Magic so
so what's the what's the net effect of
that on the price of electricity
worldwide is that does that is that
deflationary with regards to electricity
cost I think so I think this is this is
a point that I make in the Fiat stand
which is that you know we've had Fiat
subsidize all these dysfunctional forms
of energy over the last 50 years that
have led to the grid becoming unreliable
and we have Bitcoin like the Vigilante
savior that it is coming in and
providing a global subsidy for anybody
who can make electricity at a cheap rate
to monetize that and I think well not
only at a global subsidy but it's so but
so interesting because
not only you could go
to where the energy is cheap with
virtual certainty that you're going to
make more and more money
as the value of the Bitcoin increases by
by investing there assuming you assume
that the value of Bitcoin is going to
continually increase which is a logical
presupposition if it's if it's as stable
as as is claimed and it's finite
in the way that you're describing
and increasingly widely accepted by vast
numbers of people so it's also an
investment
that's likely to increase in value over
time rather than decrease so take some
of the uncertainty out of investing in
cheap electricity generating processes
that are geographically
isolated that's I just can't believe
that's true it's it's amazing that I I I
think I must be misunderstanding because
it seems like you can move the value of
the electricity electricity magically
without any of the problems of
Transportation yes exactly
wow that's certainly something okay and
in terms of you know think about it in
terms of Independence I think the
implications are pretty good because if
you have an energy source you know it
becomes far more sustainable uh to be
able to exploit that energy source if
you have a steady way of monetizing it
so I think it can help people get off
the grid that can help people become
more independent
um you know you have your own energy
sources and you have your own
um a monetary system that you use to
trade with the rest of the world and you
don't need much of the
um control of the Grid on you which is
getting more and more suffocating every
day
yes and as as this idea that we're just
spoiling the planet and our technical
activities our industrial activities our
high standard of living all that's
immoral because we're doing immeasurable
long-term harm to this pristine
biosphere like that you can just feel
the moral pressure growing there just
intensely intensely intensely yeah and I
think it's it's completely ridiculous
because uh you know every action has a
cost and this is the thing about it you
learn from economics everything has a
cost everything has an opportunity cost
and people like to present this idea as
if you know there's an evil cabal of oil
producers that are out there forcing our
governments to make our lives dependent
on these oils and what we need to do is
to just have the political will to
transition to these more advanced forms
of energy that are going to save the
planet and it's just completely
ridiculous well people people don't
understand like people don't understand
things as simple as the fact that
there's a finite amount of solar energy
that falls on a square yard of of
territory
that that at that basic level of physics
it's just while the sun is an
inexhaustible source of energy it's like
well that's true but practically
speaking that's not exactly the issue
exactly because what you need is the
power what you want is to convert that
high quantity of energy into high power
which is a lot of energy over a small
short period of time and to do that this
is this is really understanding that
what humans look for is not energy
because energy is everywhere you know
there's sun and there's wind and all of
that stuff but being able to channel
that in order in in order to use it in
high powered applications that's what
makes everything that we value possible
that's what makes surviving the winter
um a breeze for the vast majority of us
you know this is why we have our Modern
Life this is why we have transportations
because we have high power and the way
that we've managed to secure high power
the way that we built our world is
modern hydrocarbons and so the thing
that uh carbon people who are afraid of
carbon dioxide need to present is they
need to make a case that you know
stopping hydrocarbons is going to have
such a noticeable effect on the climate
that it outweighs the benefits of taking
it out because if you're not going to do
that because like you look you look at
how how this works out is that
you know we're trying to calculate The
Economic Consequences of climate change
and The Economic Consequences of our
interventions over this this has to do
with the time preference over say 50 to
100 years but the errors in your
measurements and your predictions grow
and grow and grow as you move out
decades into the future it's that those
justifications will never be forthcoming
they're they're technically impossible
and so it does it does go down to basic
principles it's like do you believe this
is a problem that can be solved by
intelligent well-meaning people who are
doing central planning and I've toyed
with those ideas and worked on U.N
committees that are devoted to uh uh
what are the U.N Millennium goals and I
looked at how that Central planning was
done and that's an interesting story in
and of itself because it isn't even
cabels of experts so this committee I
was on was composed of uh you know
ex-presidents and prime ministers and
people like that from all over the world
and so you think well they have some
political and economic expertise they're
putting together these the new vision of
the UN for the New Millennium let's say
but those aren't the people who are
actually making the decisions because
they're completely occupied they already
have lives that are absolutely full so
then the decision-making power falls
down the bureaucracy until it lands on
the shoulders of someone who has spare
time for one reason or another and they
make the decisions in the name of that
person and then all those decisions are
aggregated and there isn't anybody who's
in some sense taking Central
responsibility for that
so so that the document that I worked on
to begin with looked like it was written
by people who were stuck in the 1980s it
was all Cold War uh ideology essentially
the Northern Hemisphere against the
southern hemisphere so we just stripped
all that out
we just took it out and the reason we
were able to get away with that was that
we rewrote it
and no one else wanted to re-rewrite our
rewrite
and so it just stuck and then there was
these 200 Millennial goals essentially
and I I looked at that and I thought
well why those goals and the answer was
well there was constituencies of
interest for each of those goals and
then I thought well we need to rank
order these because there's no bloody
way we're going to do all 200.
and there was no rank ordering and the
reason for that was it would upset all
the constituencies
and I thought well
you get this weird aggregation of things
we need to do
and then the impossibility of of rank
ordering that means you don't have a
priority like what's the most important
and how do you decide that well that
problem just wasn't addressed at all
and so this well it was an object lesson
and how these sorts of things work
it was Central planning but it was it
was so dysfunctional in some way
it it's not like it's partly because
there wasn't anyone in the world who had
enough intelligence enough knowledge to
make those sorts of decisions no one
no one exists like that so well so well
I'm gonna stop with that but yeah I
think the the ultimate issue I think in
in these things I I'd go back to meases
point which is that none of these people
is making calculations with opportunity
cost that's the great thing about the
Fiat world is that everybody has
essentially a fake Fiat job wherein they
get paid regardless of actual results
you know and the Fiat World results are
optional because your money doesn't come
from the customer from many of those
people their money comes from the money
printer from up above so it's not about
how you serve uh the customer it's about
whether you do the things that the
people providing the funding right so
dissociated is dissociated from the
actual environment because the consumer
is the actual environment the consumer
is an actual living being and if you're
serving the consumer then you have you
have nature there as your witness and
your judge and then there can be all
sorts of intermediaries between that
which is what you're discussing and then
that moves the producer away from
feedback from the consumer and it ended
and it what it corrupts the signal
it corrupts the information signal okay
precisely and that's that's kind of the
other Central Point in the Fiat status
so on the one hand you're dropping
people of the purchasing power on the
other hand you're putting the decisions
in about people's lives in the hands of
people who essentially face no
opportunity cost and they have these
jobs regardless of whether they perform
them because they're linked to this
magic printer that continues to finance
them so they don't lose their job and
they always can continue to do whatever
it is that they're doing and um facing
no accountability and you know the
impact across life I think is is
enormous but it leads to all kinds of
central planning it leads to uh and and
the fundamental problem with this which
you see in the climate change debate and
you see it in the coronavirus
restrictions and response is that all of
these people don't understand the
concept of opportunity cost you know the
zoom warrior class the people whose
lives can be conducted from their
internet connection they're just
completely blind to the idea that other
people leave the house and eat it's it's
astonishing to watch it because in their
mind you know you can call for something
like let's lock everybody at home for
you know a year and a half so that
nobody gets sick
um except for being locked from being
locked at home
yeah well of course if you don't think
about you know if you don't think about
the downsides of thing then it's a
brilliant idea everything is great if
you just ignore the downsides and that's
essentially what governments can afford
to do because they don't have the
markets disciplined to essentially
correct them and that's that's what
Bitcoin brings you know well the
discipline the discipline is exactly the
lack of discipline is exactly you know
so so we could we could de-personalize
this to some degree and think about it
as a technical problem right is that
as you stack up intermediaries between
the producer and the consumer because
the signal is degraded the responses
aren't going to be accurate reflections
of what's necessary in the environment
and that sort of ideologically agnostic
what what you derive from that is you
want to set up systems where those
intermediaries don't exist because then
the signal isn't corrupted we can act
properly in concert with the with the
dictates of the genuine environment
yes exactly and in fact I begin the
second section of my Fiat standard books
called Fiat life it begins with this
idea that all living things face this
natural order of the world in which they
need to produce more than they consume
in order to survive there's just every
cell every animal every plant needs to
do this you know they're constantly
working before they die or they die
exactly and the only exception to this
is essentially the Fiat human because
they don't need to produce because they
can just live off
the money printer that comes from them
from above and so I think
we've had an enormous section of the
population that is not used to the
concept of productive work it's it's
um it's destroyed the concept of you
know the the moral imperative of work as
service to others when you take away the
fact that work is also the only way to
eat you know when work becomes optional
it becomes much easier to
um it becomes much easier to
philosophize it away and philosophize
Duty and responsibility away and that's
I think what Fiat does and you combine
that with the fact that it raises time
preference because it discourages
provision for the future and it
discourages people to think a lot of the
future and you can see that a lot of the
problems a lot of the pathology
pathologies of the 20th century I think
have their root in highly inflationary
fiat currency
a couple of objections to bitcoin let's
say
um it's not easily usable like I can't I
can't just go to the store and buy
something with Bitcoin it's not easy and
and I don't see that improving very
radically radically now maybe it's a
store of value and there will be systems
built on top of it that make those sorts
of transactions possible so but maybe
you could address that you you just
brushed over the
the issue of the multiplicity of of of
cryptocurrencies and but you made a very
telling statement there which is you
said all of them people have tried to
make Bitcoin variants and they all
failed all the other cryptocurrencies
are more like companies
and so they have someone centrally
involved and
um so why are people like Elon Musk for
example interested in coins like it's
the Deutsche Dogecoin is that due only
good every day coin is that it and it
was sort of a parody coin to begin with
as far as I my limited understanding
enables me to so Bitcoin isn't that
usable that's a problem why why
shouldn't we just be skeptical of
cryptocurrency as such given the
multiplicity of cryptocurrencies so
yeah so in terms of the usability I
think
um the the limit the reason that you
don't use Bitcoin currently to buy
things from uh your shop is not the
technological use issue it's simply the
liquidity issue it's the fact that for
the vast majority of people right now
uh well overall the money balances over
the world uh Bitcoin constitutes
somewhere in the range of one percent of
the world's money balances so the odds
that you are going to be trading with
somebody
who has enough Bitcoin that they are
willing to take the other end of the
trade you know say you want to buy a
sandwich and they're willing to lose
some to accept some extra Bitcoin to add
it onto their balance sheet is very low
because most people have zero Bitcoin
and most people haven't heard of Bitcoin
so it's still very early so
um the the that problem is
um is in my mind it's just an issue of
liquidity it's not an issue of interface
or users you know you don't know how
your refrigerator works your car a lot
of machines we have no idea how they
work but you know you know how to
operate them and so Bitcoin is like that
and we saw in El Salvador you know now
um McDonald's and Starbucks are
accepting Bitcoin it's just there is a
very easy way in in El Salvador in El
Salvador yeah why why
so it was announced as a national
currency as a legal tender
um in Salvador in fact you know we're
recording just one day after that law
went into effect so now El Salvador has
two official currencies the US dollar
and Bitcoin they used to run on why did
they do that
um it's an interesting move from the
president of El Salvador I think yeah
it's a radical move it's amazing I can't
believe it yeah one one motivation is
that a lot of el salvadorians send
remittances back to their country and
there's a lot of money in that so they
could save with it on bitcoin right so
that's a place where Bitcoin could
really would could really get wide usage
is this a replacement for things like
Western Union that's a big deal given
how much money passes from First World
countries to third world countries it's
a huge issue
yes and I think uh you know still over
time I still think you know it's it's
um it's it's gonna be a while until the
whole world can move on to uh Bitcoin
based economy because it's just you know
you don't there's a hundred trillion
dollars of money out there in the world
we're not going to bitcoin can't eat all
of that in a weekend no but it's
stunning that it's even one percent of
that I mean that's unbelievable that's a
huge percentage of it it's it's a huge
percentage because you know the the vast
majority of that the vast majority of
currencies are under one percent Bitcoin
is bigger than the vast majority of
currencies there's only like maybe five
or six currencies that are bigger than
Bitcoin the big ones you know and then
all the other ones are just timely
infractions next to it so it's
astonishing that we've gotten so far but
I think uh you know in terms of the
interface issue it's uh let me just put
it this way all of the solutions that
you currently use for paying with your
Fiat can't be adapted for Bitcoin you
know Visa could add you know Visa
already provides the US dollar and the
Canadian dollar in the Euro and 160
currencies from all over the world they
can add 161 and then you'll be able to
pay with Bitcoin okay so do you think
that's a threshold issue enough users
that'll just start to happen the market
will drive that okay now and we have the
Bitcoin native Solutions as well
okay now the issue of the other
cryptocurrencies the other
cryptocurrencies I think in my mind they
are dilutive of each other but they are
not dilutive of Bitcoin because um
Bitcoin continues to grow very rapidly
and I think
um you know the other cryptocurrencies
their value proposition rests on some
kind of special feature that they
provide none of them is really trying to
compete with Bitcoin on being this
neutral money neutral protocol none of
them can claim in any kind of serious
sense to be uh doing that so
okay so so let me ask you about that so
so does that mean that Bitcoin is
addressing the issue of the store of
value the long-term permanent store of
value decentralized in the most
philosophically uh profound possible
manner in some sense these other
cryptocurrencies they have other
features but that's not the problem
they're essentially trying to address
yes so they're in a different category
yeah all the currencies that try to
Market themselves as a competitor to
Bitcoin in this field have sunk Without
a Trace and the ones that have stuck
around have introduced a whole bunch of
buzzwords about other things that they
supposed to be doing and like what like
what what what what's what's been
popular
so there's all kinds of things like you
know smart contracts and uh
decentralized Finance honestly if you
ask me like uh none of that stuff has
shown any uh sign of being anything more
than a uh basically a a pump and dump
scheme wherein you know people come in
and they buy the token there's a story
like there's a story about how this
thing is going to be used for you know
there was talk about betting markets and
uh smart contracts and uh real estate on
the blockchain and
um and now they're putting uh pictures
on the blockchain and they're selling
art on the blockchain and all these fads
come and go but
um ultimately none of them needs its own
monetary system in order for it to
function and I think the
the accurate interpretation here is that
these things are just monetary systems
that have a side story that they're
selling you about what their application
is but nobody's really buying them in
order to buy these applications because
they don't really perform anything that
Bitcoin cannot do or that you know any
kind of um real world use case it's just
people are buying these currencies
um and they're speculating on the price
and the value of all of these currencies
is going up because you know we're
starting from a very small level however
I think you know the distinction is that
in the long run
these currencies need to continue to
invent new stories and continue to
invent new narratives to continue to
drive more attention to them
um but whatever story you invent in your
currency you know there will be other
currencies that will come and uh invest
in you know promoting this in a better
way so I think they are diluted for each
other because whatever value proposition
you have you know let's say our
blockchain network does the best smart
contracts well what's stopping somebody
else from copying that there's nothing
that you can't copy about it they can
just move the same thing and start
another Network that does it
um right which is essentially the
equivalent of printing money it's the
electronic equivalent of printing money
in that currency exactly and so I think
you know maybe this speculative game
won't run long but ultimately
altcoins are easy money because they
individually you can increase their
supply there's a group of people that
can sit down and change the money supply
for all of these coins and that's the
case with you know the second biggest uh
currency after Bitcoin they they've
changed their monetary policy six times
maybe since creation and uh and that's
which platform
ethereum ethereum right right and and
yeah yeah so they've changed the
monetary Supply so they could change it
in any case and you know uh if anything
tells us is that there's always reasons
why you want to print money so there
will come times in which you're gonna
need to print money and there will be
pressure and they did go through a case
where you know somebody hacked
um their uh somebody hacked one of their
uh contracts took a lot of money out of
it from the people that were pretty
influential in it and they did roll it
back they effectively
um essentially ran an admin move where
they froze everybody's account well not
exactly froze but they reversed the
transactions in order to secure their
own they reset the day exactly exactly
so that's that's you know that's that's
the best competitor when it comes to
bitcoin so none of them can really
establish the scarcity so for me in the
long run I would not recommend I I don't
feel comfortable recommending any of
this of course you could make money in
the short run there's a lot of
fluctuation but in the long run you know
these things continue to make more and
the supply continuous increase and you
need and you need a base of people to
continue to hold them for the long run
in order for the value to stay in them
and I don't see any compelling narrative
for people to want to store serious
value in these currencies in the long
run and I don't see that they could
trust it because of the fact that it can
be increased and I think you know it
individually can be trees but
collectively all of them you know you're
constantly making new currencies that
trading on this novelty so the market
for novelty you know the demand for
novelty even if it's larger than the
demand for the store of value of Bitcoin
is getting dissipated at the all the
extra inflation on all these novelty
coins that are being added every year
um and you know I I don't pay much
attention to this world because in my
mind um I've paid enough attention and
seen the patterns which is that it's you
know these stories are generally there
to
um
sell the story of the currency that
exists there but I think Bitcoin is
really all you need Bitcoin is the one
that I that I can trust will be there in
10 years in 15 and 20 and 15. okay so
let me ask you about one more thing I
want to I want you to talk about your
online learning platform and why you
built that why you're doing that what do
you think the implications are what you
offer people uh what that means for the
future of Education let's say why you
aren't in the traditional University
system I know that's a lot but I do
really want to hear what you have to say
about it
um I wasn't the traditional University
system but um you know the internet
changes everything and um towards the
time when I uh started learning about
Bitcoin it really changed the way that I
think about the world and and gave me an
understanding of the power of technology
and and the power of uh Innovation and
the power of the internet and I started
realizing just the limitation of the
physical University model which is
you're stuck in a small classroom with
students many of them are there just
because they want the credentials not
for the actual learning and the
economics of it are not very good
because you know the students pay a lot
of money and this professors don't get
paid a lot of money and a lot of money
gets lost in the middle in the gigantic
bureaucracy which expands way faster
than the faculty and and continually
undermines the power of the faculty with
the faculty's own uh what would you call
they're concentrating on the research
and they're politically naive and they
get they get their power gets inflated
away to a tremendous degree every year
I've warned my colleagues about this
sort of thing
continually when I was a faculty member
and they never paid attention I said you
you're you just have no idea what you're
giving away and well okay so so and I
you know I've had the same experience as
you I think I mean I was I've had a lot
of health problems recently but I was
thinking about going back to the
university I've resigned from the
University of Toronto and my my original
position I'm a professor emeritus now
but I thought if I'm well enough to go
back to the university and teach
I'm well enough to teach on the net
if I teach on the net I can talk to
people like you every day
I never have to teach the same course
twice
I can learn while I'm teaching
and I can teach to like 500 000 to a
million people continually so why in the
world with no administrative overhead
whatsoever direct to Consumer exactly so
that was that was really it and um for
me I think the most uh frustrating part
of
um Academia is uh the the peer-reviewed
journal nonsense it's just an enormously
frustrating ritual where you need that's
no no the grant the grant writing system
is worse yeah well I'm in my defense I
never went that far I could never get
myself to rap well you know the typical
the typical researcher in the United
States in particular you get big grants
in the US but they're impossible to get
whereas in Canada you get small grants
and if you do a grant proposal properly
you'll probably get a grant small but in
the states the typical scientist spends
40 percent of his or her time writing
Grant proposals and that that is not
what they're good at like that's not the
same as being an entrepreneurial and
researcher it isn't the same skill set
at all yeah it's it's a so it's a and
then you don't get the grants yeah and
in particular teaching is massively
massively undervalued in the modern
University you know your University
hires you mostly for how many
Publications you can get no no no no no
no no now it hires you mostly for you
the quality of your diversity statement
no I'm not kidding I'm not kidding this
is really happening in California
Cardinal but not also not research now
it's literally the case that in the UC
systems
the diversity statement which is just
something that that crept in say five
six years ago you have to provide a
diversity statement along with your
research statement that has more weight
with regards to the hiring procedure
than the research uh history and
teaching well it's like who cares about
the damn undergraduates right so yeah
education is another chapter in the Fiat
standard where you know I take my
experience from the University world
where essentially again it's the same
story the financing doesn't come from
the customers for the students whether
it's at the University or School level
it comes from above and so the
bureaucracy is optimized for sucking
more money from above and it essentially
uses the students as the props to do
that in fact you know universities get a
lot of money uh a lot more money from
governments directly or indirectly you
know government subsidize the loans for
the students so even student money is
effectively government money and so
um they're they're optimal eyes and
focus thing on kissing the hand that
feeds them and that's why the university
is becoming so politicized it's also
part of theocity it's it it's it's it's
not the case when it's not how
universities function under the gold
standard they were at far more Integrity
because the money you had integrity and
so the only way that you could get your
University to have money was you know to
teach people useful things so that they
would be happy and they would tell their
friends to go to that University and
they would donate money but this kind of
cycle is breaking now and that's why we
see so many
um God even The Economist even The
Economist Miracle of Miracles has
published articles in the last month
pointing out that the politicization of
the University campus which is something
that I've been observing for like 20
years and have been warning people about
is having these massive Downstream
consequences throughout Society
it's like and that's definitely the case
and so why is that politicization
occurring
so exactly and so for me you know it was
I wanted to just
um I I it was like you know Bitcoin like
uber it's a sidestep the entire
um monster and figure out what it is
what is the essence of what it is that
I'm good at I like to teach I enjoy
teaching so I'm going to build a website
and I'm going to you know I I the the
writing the Bitcoin standard was uh what
allowed me the courage to take this
moment I I regret not doing it earlier
um but once I had a little bit of a
global audience that I could follow you
know it was I could teach many more
students that I could teach in a
physical classroom where much more
interested and you know this is this is
what I learned from Austin economics you
want to follow the place where you're
able to create more value that's what
you need to follow so people seem to
like what I was doing online and so I
thought I'm going to try and figure it
out so how long has this been yeah how
long has it been in operation is that
safetean.com
17.com yes two years now I've had it
running for uh to actually yeah just
turned two years uh ah a couple of weeks
ago I didn't make a big deal well
congratulations so so so tell me tell me
like
um what size audience are you serving
how is it growing what have you learned
how are you generating Revenue
the first couple of years I've focused
on building rather than
um getting a bigger audience I've made
it a little bit more uh it's it's mainly
focused on you know my audience on
Twitter they're the ones who sign up I
haven't promoted it widely I haven't
done any advertisement I haven't raised
funds I've been focused for the first
couple of years on just uh learning
um how to do the courses online and to
putting the courses online and focusing
on the topic itself you know how to make
an actual online course rather than
marketing this and growing it and on on
also finding my two books so it's like
the platform for me to
um
intellectually stimulate myself and
discuss things with students as I write
the book it was enormously valuable for
me to writing the book and it's you know
I remember in the university the
teaching process is something that gives
you the ideas for writing and I wanted
to make sure that I had that as I left
the university I didn't want to just
write I wanted to have seminars where I
discuss things so I could I I have two
live seminars every week with members of
safe indeed.com uh twice a week we get
together and we discuss my books my work
my courses uh Bitcoin in general
Austrian economics and all kinds of
other issues and so now now it's a
little bit it's being done on a smaller
scale as I was focusing on the courses
in the books the plan is you know
starting next year I'm going to start uh
hopefully expanding the operation as I
have my books completed and my next two
books and we're also writing an
economics textbook as well
so you know the the next problem to
solve for the decentralization of
Education I've been thinking about this
for a long time as as it's possible to
learn more and more online
is accreditation is where all the value
is all of it and I've talked to many
wise academics like seriously wise
academics who know perfectly well that
there's almost zero Financial utility in
the knowledge that universities are
dispensing to students it's not zero but
it's it's low but there's tremendous
residual value in the accreditation
so the next big revolution is going to
be the decentralization hopefully the
decentralization of accreditation so
that there's a there's a there's a way
of providing
verifiable accreditation so I've been
thinking about that so you to some
degree so you can imagine something like
a set of exams
where only 10 percent of the people who
take them pass or maybe it's 20 percent
that's bronze 10 that's silver five
percent that's gold you can retake the
exams multiple times
but you keep it scarce
and so
the accreditation there's tremendous
economic value in the decentralization
of of educational accreditation because
the content is going to be provided
right white people like you perhaps by
people like me that's going to just keep
happening and that's going to find its
own Market
so well so I don't know how that problem
might be solved but yeah the way that I
solved it in my first two years was that
I just told people you know
um I'm gonna only give knowledge I'm not
gonna do anything right right
yeah that that's that's a that's a
reasonable approach too you know and and
it sort of relies on your trust in the
students themselves in some sense right
you don't have to sit through this
you're not going to get anything out of
it except the knowledge that's a
reasonable approach and maybe it's the
right one it's just
for those who wish to educate to do so
and to let the chips fall where they're
going to fall
and also I think you know that there is
there are some downsides to testing that
you have to kind of formulate the
education in a way that is uh amidable
for testing and that can yeah corrupt
the system
exactly and I kind of it's like
predicting the future
right it's the same problem it's like
which part of the knowledge that you've
learned is relevant
and can we form and so there's the
hypothesis that we can formalize that
now you know you might be able to do it
in some ways by
because maybe you can test something
like uh literate literacy
right because that's a that's a broad
scale skill that's you useful across
multiple domains and so maybe there's a
role there for for testing to specify
level of skill
but it gets much more difficult in other
areas so that's that's partly why the
the accreditation problem is a real
tough one to solve to do it properly
I don't know I I go back and forth on
whether accreditation really is such a
big deal or whether if it's going
whether the whole issue of gravitation
is going to be devalued over time
because yeah
in a sense I can see how it was valuable
in the pre-internet world where you know
going to a university and spending four
years thinking courses with the experts
on a topic next to a physical library
that actually contained the books on the
topic was
um basically the only way that you could
establish confidence in the topic and
getting a degree that you've ticked all
of the boxes was a very reliable signal
that you did do that but now you know
the knowledge is all out there the the
people looking to hire you are becoming
increasingly practical increasingly
specialized about what they're looking
for you know it's not that big of a deal
whether you have a degree in all of
those um
fascinating topics that you learned
about
um you know can you build a mouth strap
that catches right exactly have you so
that might mean that the accreditation
problem is actually downloaded to the
people who consume the students so to
speak right so and that that's the
people who are doing the hiring I mean
the hiring people have a tough job and
they were using accreditation as a
shortcut to doing their job properly
relying on the institutional validity of
the universities to select the proper
students and they were universities were
basically doing that on the basis of it
of uh
making it difficult to get into the
universities and and by proxy selecting
people who had high levels of of G fluid
intelligence
so
basically yeah and it's it's becoming
less and less valuable as a signal as
knowledge becomes everywhere it becomes
available everywhere you don't need to
go to a physical library and you don't
need to be next to the professor you can
download the lectures online and you can
discuss things with the students online
you can recreate the entire University
experience online uh basically now is it
as fun as going on to a campus well no
but you know when you think about the
difference in costs you could learn an
entire undergraduate degree for a couple
hundred bucks online
um you know think about all the extra
money that you save and all the extra
time that you save and then think about
how much fun you could have with that
that's when it becomes a fair comparison
I think
[Music]
well look that was great I learned a
tremendous amount you really made me
think uh you cleared up a lot of the
questions I had about cryptocurrency and
about uh about Bitcoin I understand how
it functions better some of it was
absolutely fascinating like that idea
that you can monetize energy production
in in
areas that wouldn't be able to ship the
electricity to Market that's that's
absolutely mind-boggling it'll take me
like five years to think that through
it's so and it seems to completely
contradict the idea that Bitcoin is a
waste of in of of the world's resources
right it's it's a it's got It's a
complete opposite if that if this
monetization idea is actually true so
that's really really interesting so yeah
that was great I'd like to talk to you
again at some point so
um
we'll see how people respond to this and
what sort of questions they have and
what sort of things they might like us
to discuss but uh I really enjoyed the
conversation so thanks a lot for for all
that and good luck with your book
your new book so that new book so
everyone remembers the two books are
um
the Bitcoin standard and the Fiat
standard and my you're going to learn a
lot by reading those books an awful lot
I learned a lot about the Austrian
School of Economics too and about its
fundamental philosophical differences
and that was really useful to me as well
so lots of lots of pieces fell into
place a sign of a good conversation when
that happens
so thank you thank you very much it was
an absolute pleasure as well I enjoyed
talking to you very much and I hope you
do it again
[Music]